Week 1 Q: What did data sovereignty mean this week, in code?

ENTRY KEYS: 
defining data sovereignity --  DEFINE(data + sovereignity) 

DEFINE
(+) data: direct monetizable information, often unstructured and accumulated over the course of "doing" and "being". _DEFINITION SOURCED_ READING FROM CYPHER X BUILD FOUNDATIONAL READING OF "Infonomics" Douglas B. Laney  
→ Learn to treat data as an asset class that can be valued, managed, and monetized. (source:https://drive.google.com/file/d/1dk7fsBDqHb3RChO8UTfBEx8KmzU6YmG2/view?usp=drivesdk)
Takeaway: Start thinking, What is my data worth? Who benefits from it? How can I reuse it across clients?

(+) sovereignity: the supreme, absolute authority and self-governing power of a state to manage its affairs; to be free of external control.   
→ Learn to ask, "Liberation from what?" or "Freedom to do, say, or feel what?"(source: Sovereignty & Remembrance book)
Takeaway: 
- Self determination is inherit to a free individuals. 
- Determinining your own story, defining language for yourself and for those you call "kin" or community is foundational  
- Self governance means being free of foreign/ 3rd party influence
- Creating authentically to your culture should feel empowering and anchored in your history when free peole are allowed to create
- Supreme authority means all your creation are controlled by you and your community; 

(+) data sovereignty: an individual or community holding sumpreme ownership over the information they produce, 
and holding absolte authority in how the information they produce is valued, managed and monetized: 
- how it is valued, 
- who benefits from its value 
- who has access to it
→ Learn to ask, "What data/knowledge do I have that others don't?"
→ Learn to ask, "How can we use information (my data + external sources) to make better/faster decisions? 
→ Learn to ask, "What questions can we ask now that couldn’t be addressed earlier (before we knew the value of my informamtion)?"
Takeaway: 
- data sovereignty is about ppl and communities of data producers, and information holders having an inherit and supreme control over how the information they produce, exchange, and accumulate. 
- data sovereighty allows individual ppl to live a rich life, where they can trust, have access and feel secure about the information they value and is valued in the society they live in. 
- determining value of information is a dialectic, but who benefits from data's value should be determined by the creator of the information and the community
- the power to preserve and license information lie in the individual producer, not the owner of the medium through with information is transfered or held
- language, art, and math afford all individuals the mediums to express, share, and accumulate data, and thus produce knowledge that holds value for how an individual, institution, or society 

Thus W1 Q: What did data sovereignty mean this week, in code?

A) Personally: I'm asking myself, "what data do I own that I don't realize has value for my life?" I know that I'm using a ton of platforms to tell stories, or express that "I am here," recreating a "hello, world" moment with every instagram post, every "ok" click on a retail site, and every like of a reel. 
And yet I know provide that in providing that data to those platforms I am not learning the answers to questions that need answers to to make better/ faster decisions. 
Doom scrolling doesn't create value for me that I benefit from beyond how I'm able to filter content once it reaches me. At the same time, that info sent to me has been designed to reach me based on code, and the things I encode through my clicks. 
I like to think I've trained my IG, but I also know that I'm rationalize. If I had actually coded in my own IG it would still be chronological, and function more liek a radio with frequencies, and less like a 1:30am infomerial on loop. 
I think that selling me things is a violation of my sovereignty, but at the same time, I'm opting into the platform, and if I removed it I would have that issue/ that entity wouldn't be able to collect my info...as easily. 
I don't believe I have data sovereignty, and I think that is a class issue as well one of race. At the same time, I'm building a platform that allows me to capture that great pieces of IP I have without prying ears.
I'm building the RIL and Remembrance Day to maximize this growth in my data sovereignty by also sovereignty of other. 

B) In Relation to Others: I think we get to experience being the libraries and protective spaces for the people around us. Indirectly and directly we're eachothers keepers. Keeping eachothers story. We used to memorize eachothers street addresses, the house phone number, and the birthdays of all your neighborhood friends. 
We code switch, and that is a form of accessing data sovereignty. What's very clear is that language is a source, technology for establishing identity, self regard; and to establish who you are in relation to others. When we speak to other people, we are naturally exchanging data, information, where the value is yet to determined in full.
Code switching, changing tone, accent, cadence, choice is vocabular, are all choices born from the ownership of information, either inherited or learned. 
"In code" data sovereignty shows up in the tension between collaboration, ownership, and managing who benefits from information. 
Many of our most famous tech companies are born from stories of individuals arguing who owns "the code": 
  (1) the language used to express the thought/idea 
  (2) the benefit gained from that language being expressed 
  (3) the ratio of ownership or benefit to be attributed to an individual or community 
  (4) how long that individual or community may benefit from that info exclusively 
  (5) least considered is who owns the unexpected accumulated, often unstructured, outputs of the code, and 
are those unexpected outputs owed by the producer(s), the witness (those who recognize the value of the information but don't create it); or 
do those who generator/ create value from the information the owners of these unexpected productions (i.e. dark data)

C) In Relation to Systems: I'm responible for the things I say, so I must be responsible for the things that I write in code. I'm not just allowed to take credit for when my code produces outputs that are pleasing or offer a heristic benefit. 
I believe I am also responible for the way that my language, my expressions, my attribution of those expressions, and my response to feedback from those impacted by my expression. 
To not be responsible to how your code impacts people is to choose to beleive you are somehow sovereign, and others are not; to believe that the freedom you pursue requires you to create narratives, solutions, and systems of thought that aim to control the narratives, cultures, and historical value of other seemingly soverieign individuals. 
If your code, born of your thoughts, is anything other than an expression of your self evaluation, an attempt to grow, or an expression of service, then it is most likely noise, disruption.
Even if the system you create produces a benefit, if it requires the devaluing, extraction, and or erasure of others' information, (without consent) then you are most likely violating the data sovereignty of another to increase your own sense that the value you're "holding" has more value.
When the information extracted from a system doesn't lead to better decisions, or faster decisions that evenutaly lead to better choices, then what is the value of that process of extraction? 

D) In Relation to Cypher: We're going to continue provide a proof-of-concept that trust access and sovereignty are enough of a value proposition. We're here to support the psychologicla safety of our communities and the business ecosystem we serve. So by holding a "non-negotiable" position on protecting our clients data, IP, data privacy we're able to 
support their journey as a sovereign producer of data and conscious generator of monetizable information. We're a symbiotic organism like a bromaid in the jungle. We can profit from the generate opportutnites that come from the unexpected accumulations, and "dark data". 

E) In Relation to Remembrance: Put simply, I built all the real world consent components first and now we're building out the code that reflects the human centered approach. We make sure that the people "code" or protocol is intentional about meeting people, our elders, and collaborators where they are as data producers (often unaware) and is meant to 
support their development as data sovereign. When we support elders in:

1. identifying what info/ data they have that is valueble to them
2. shaping how they want to express their insight (oral history, memoir, playwriting, etc) 
3. defending against systems, and individuals who attempt to benefit from their ideas, art, and memories.  

by coding in the features that require consent, and allow data producers to have tiers of control for access to their data, we're creating a new relationship between individuals and the mediums used to.
historically platforms/systems pretent to be "public squares"/"listening ears"/ "stages", while they do allow data to be exchanges, they aren't creating benefit that is mutual or reciprical, but superficial.
In exchange for unlimited access/ ownership to/of your sovereign data they give you access to a curated feed of extracted info, but no information that allows for better or faster decisions.  

Worse, if you've provides information that is intended to create insight-to-action you're eexpected to pay (in time on platform) or $$ to "reach" more ppl. 
A medium that forces you to pay more (time/$$) to exchanage your knowledge with ppl is disrupting the sovereignty.
Remembrance is a bet, that by, (1) coding in consent at both the human and digital layers (2) focusing on desigining a medium that is non-extractive, and connective we're able to give folks permission to ask:
1. "what information do I hold that has value to me or my community?"
2. "where am I giving away information about myself, and how is that lack of privacy limiting?"
3. "if I didn't have this medium (IG, FB, TikTok) how would I share my thoughts with the world or receive information that can benefit me?"


