What did data sovereignty mean this week, in code?

ENTRY KEYS: 
defining data sovereignity --  DEFINE(data + sovereignity) 

DEFINE
(+) data: direct monetizable information, often unstructured and accumulated over the course of "doing" and "being". _DEFINITION SOURCED_ READING FROM CYPHER X BUILD FOUNDATIONAL READING OF "Infonomics" Douglas B. Laney  
→ Learn to treat data as an asset class that can be valued, managed, and monetized. (source:https://drive.google.com/file/d/1dk7fsBDqHb3RChO8UTfBEx8KmzU6YmG2/view?usp=drivesdk)
Takeaway: Start thinking, What is my data worth? Who benefits from it? How can I reuse it across clients?

(+) sovereignity: the supreme, absolute authority and self-governing power of a state to manage its affairs; to be free of external control.   
→ Learn to ask, "Liberation from what?" or "Freedom to do, say, or feel what?"(source: Sovereignty & Remembrance book)
Takeaway: 
- Self determination is inherit to a free individuals. 
- Determinining your own story, defining language for yourself and for those you call "kin" or community is foundational  
- Self governance means being free of foreign/ 3rd party influence
- Creating authentically to your culture should feel empowering and anchored in your history when free peole are allowed to create
- Supreme authority means all your creation are controlled by you and your community; 

(+) data sovereignty: an individual or community holding sumpreme ownership over the information they produce, 
and holding absolte authority in how the information they produce is valued, managed and monetized: 
- how it is valued, 
- who benefits from its value 
- who has access to it
→ Learn to ask, "What data/knowledge do I have that others don't?"
→ Learn to ask, "How can we use information (my data + external sources) to make better/faster decisions? 
→ Learn to ask, "What questions can we ask now that couldn’t be addressed earlier (before we knew the value of my informamtion)?"
Takeaway: 
- data sovereignty is about ppl and communities of data producers, and information holders having an inherit and supreme control over how the information they produce, exchange, and accumulate. 
- data sovereighty allows individual ppl to live a rich life, where they can trust, have access and feel secure about the information they value and is valued in the society they live in. 
- determining value of information is a dialectic, but who benefits from data's value should be determined by the creator of the information and the community
- the power to preserve and license information lie in the individual producer, not the owner of the medium through with information is transfered or held
- language, art, and math afford all individuals the mediums to express, share, and accumulate data, and thus produce knowledge that holds value for how an individual, institution, or society 

Wk2 summary:

- I'm building the tools that I want/ intend my family to use. 
- Creating consent functionality as a features. 
- I thikn the website will be a beaacon, so it needs to function differenlty in the future. 

Week 3.  Q: What did data sovereignty mean this week, in code?

Wk3 Key: 

I. Measuring Attribution gaps when an LLM query requires RAG (service for Cypher to offer & a Key UVP of RIL is that it's "non-extractive" framework avoids this
issue from the begining, starting with the intake form. 

II. Using a 6-hat x CoP x MOOC program framework is in direct alignment with Cypher's work and ready-made for a RIL pilot. I think we can apply it to 
Cypher Impact Labs (measure creativity amplification, clustering groups of users to provide intervention, Bianca's protocol)
Remembrance (this is easily a way to pilot a elder or youth program that attempts to show a relationshp between RIL and creativity (ideation, integration of ideas)
which are precursors to our process gaining awareness of data assets and the capacity/ connection to generating value from the asset. data as story or other.

I read a paper through my journal club subscription, "The attribution crisis in LLM search results: Estimating ecosystem exploitation". See Journal Club Reflections
It shaped this weeks refleciton on sovereignity by validating the current standards of LLM use that are problematic. A lack of attibution is a crisis
in the internet, and also with how LLM and other apps are used on our phones, smart tvs, games, cars, and applications. Just as their is exploitation of value
in the internet extraction, the extraction from people, their data, is exploitation, and also not offering value in the outputs, at least not immediate value. 

Our work is non-extractive, and intends to avoid exploitation but provide consent feautres, a council of review, an embargo function, even before we collect
a single piece of audio data. No attribution risk due to to the need for specfic consent as a way to begin the process. 

I'm invested in locally owned systems and thus my bet is a database x LLM powerd system of elders data, linked to location, space, timelines, and specific themes will
not have attribution issues due to the sourcing and process of sourcing. I don't know how critacal RAG will be, but I'm sure it will be. And I do imagine eventually i'll
have to test attribition gaps when this tool is being asked to serve users beyond the demo/ prototype phase.

The paper ENA allow us to measure the frequency + network relationship within the MOOC and the GenAi intervention for Digial CoPs

Key MAIN: Our use of LLM to produce a platform for generating storytelling engagemnet through a CoP is possible, we'll need to keep in mind how we measure. 

1. The use of MOOCs x GENai was made viable for measurement by structuring the sequence of how students
used the MOOC discussion, creating groups and a cadence for each "hat" discussion

2. ENA is a network analysis tool for visualizing/mapping the relationship betwen phases of thinking to show how
students share ideas, connect over space & time. 

3. GenAI can be a SPRINGBOARD for highly creative ppl AND a CRUTCH for low creativity ppl


In Relation: 
personal - I spent hours ensuring that that we build end-to-end witih our principles in mind. Thus we've build our inttake from scratch to ensure we understand any risk from UX frontend. 
interpersonal - Others - I'm confident that the UX looks familar and is simple and clean. I wanted to ensure permission, not capture all the date at once
interpoperable - Systems - [CTA] We're now using CloudeFare (worker) + Vercel + Airtable + Github + Claude Code. I need to spend time investigating where information moves!
Cypher - Manages the data pipeline, application updates, feature changes and UX QA. Not user facing but is customer facing for the data pieces that 
have consent for use in research, edu, and public. 
Remembrance - We're buiding an artifact to inform the RIL prototype. It took maybe a 5-8 days. And it will save us a lot of work when this form is highly popular. We could
have kept it as a static HTML. But keeping it at jsx React application allows us to function for scale, today. 




